# What is it like to work in a clinical microbiology lab?
### How did you get into clinical microbiology?
I graduated in 2016 with a Bachelor of Science in chemistry and immediately discovered that having just a bachelor's degree wasn't going to get me many great job opportunities. I worked as a processor in a clinical cytology laboratory for several years and went back to school to become qualified for an M(ASCP) certification, which is a certification that allows you to practice clinical microbiology in labs contracted with Medicare, which is pretty much every medical diagnostics lab in the US. I later got an MB(ASCP) certification in molecular biology to help with future job prospects. I work between 20 and 40 hours a week in a busy medium-sized hospital laboratory that does bacteriology, virology, mycology (molds and yeasts), and some parasitology. 
### What does a typical work day look like?
Clinical laboratories operate around-the-clock. Most staff where I work have either eight-hour or ten-hour shifts, and the day is divided into day/evening/night shifts, sometimes also referred to as first/second/third. I work ten hour days, and I work a mix of evenings and nights. The majority of staff in the laboratory work day shift and are present during business operational hours when we are seeing patients as part of our clinical practice. There are two types of non-management staff in our department: "techs," who hold the Medical Laboratory Scientist title and have an MLS(ASCP), MT(ASCP), or M(ASCP) certification, and processors, who have educational backgrounds varying from high school to B.S. degrees. Processors receive incoming specimens and prepare them for testing. Techs perform testing, identify organisms, and report results. Techs are typically assigned to a "bench" on any given workday, which is a set of related tasks that must all be performed during that shift. 
### Processing
Both techs and processors are able to process, and on high-volume days or under unusual circumstances (like a pandemic), techs may participate in processing as their assigned task or during downtime. What needs to be done to process a specimen in a microbiology lab varies from specimen to specimen and depends on what tests are ordered, so processors have to remember quite a lot of stuff in order to be efficient. In my opinion this job is much more difficult and physically demanding than the job of the techs, even though processors are typically paid less. A specimen generally goes through the following steps during processing:
- Accessioning and order entry, which is when the specimen label is examined and looked up in the LIMS (laboratory information management system) to verify that the correct patient name and identifiers are present and to figour out which tests have been ordered. 
  - This may involve cancelling tests and ordering the correct test for a particular specimen or calling a physician to ask for clarification on what they actually want done, as doctors sometimes order incorrect or nonsensical tests for a particular type of specimen. 
  - This may also involve rejecting the specimen and calling a nurse or physician to request recollection. Specimen collection technique matters a lot more than you might expect, and sometimes we get things that weren't collected correctly and we won't proceed with testing them because the results of the test could be invalid or the specimen could be contaminated. Sometimes patients lose the sterile specimen collection containers they're given and they bring in stool or urine samples in non-sterile containers like a margarine tub that they ran through the "sterilization" cycle on their dishwasher. Sometimes doctors or nurses collect stuff incorrectly too. We get a lot of "sputum" that is actually just spit. 
- Actual processing of the specimen, which varies wildly from case to case and may involve centrifugation, tissue grinding, transferring part of the specimen into other tubes to be run through diferent instruments (lab equipment), or plating the specimen on appropriate agar.
  - Plating the specimen means to take a small amount of the specimen, usually a liquid, and use a sterile plastic stick called a loop to streak it gently across the surface of a petri dish filled with agar using a particular streaking pattern. Agar, or media, is a type of gel that contains various nutrients, antibiotics, dyes, or inhibiting agents that will help some bacteria grow or prevent others from growing. This is for the main part of our lab work, bacteriology, which is the identification of bacteria growing in a specimen. Plates are then put in an incubator at the appropriate temperature for the testing desired. An incubator is (and looks like) the opposite of a fridge. It's just a big tall warm box. 
  - Preparing slides for the specimen. How many slides need to be prepared is dependent upon the specimen type and what testing has been ordered, but preparing a slide usually involves taking a using a pipette to place a single drop of liquid (or liquified) specimen on a glass slide and then smearing the specimen out on the slide, sometimes using another slide.
- Storage or transfer of the specimen, which also is highly dependent on specimen type and tests ordered. We want to be able to redo testing or remake our agar plates if something goes wrong later on in the process, so we make sure to retain specimens at an appropriate temperature so that the specimen won't degrade and so that any bacteria (or virus or mold or yeast) present in the specimen won't be destroyed. 
Techs typically don't do processing on day or evening shift, so I don't do much of this part of the work anymore, but on night shift I used to work alone and so I did all my own processing for anything that came in. In a smaller lab a tech might help with processing all the time, but in a larger commercial lab a tech may never ever process and in fact might not be allowed to because they aren't considered "competent" on it since they don't do it enough and might mess it up.
### Stains & Slides
One of the benches a tech might be assigned to in a given work day involves staining and reading any slides that need to be done. Not all specimens have slides made, but most specimens where some kind of bacterial or fungal culture is ordered have at least one slide associated with them. Slides are placed on a heat block to dry and "fix" them, which both kills the bacteria and helps them stick to the slide, and then they are sprayed with methanol and allowed to dry, which also serves to fix them. The slides are then stained and looked at under a microscope. Bacteria and most human cells aren't naturally particularly colorful, so putting just a plain old heat-fixed slide on a microscope and trying to look at it is not going to be productive. We stain the slides using a variety of chemicals, and the different stains used vary depending on what it is you're trying to look for or look at, but the most frequent stain we use is called Gram stain. This type of stain works on most of the common bacteria and allows us to give the physician a very preliminary result about what organisms might be present in the patient's specimen. If we call up a doctor and tell them that their patient's blood culture has Gram-negative rods present on the Gram stain, that gives the doctor several useful pieces of information: a) your patient is probably septic and needs immediate treatment, since they have bacteria growing in a body system that should be sterile, b) the bacteria is probably within such-and-such general class of organisms, and c) antibiotics that are generally effective against Gram-negative are more likely to be helpful to the patient. This bench involves a lot of looking through the microscope and a lot of talking to people on the phone.
Gram staining is not the only staining you might do on this kind of bench. There are also stains meant to be more useful for seeing yeasts, molds, mycobacteria (the type of bacteria that cause tuberculosis), or even parasites. You cannot see any human viruses through a microscope. You can sometimes see the *effects* of viruses on human cells using a microscope, but that is the job of the anatomic pathology departments in the lab. We do also generally report out a rough range for the number of white blood cells we see on a Gram stain, because this information can indicate to a doctor that the patient may have a viral infection even if we don't see or grow any bacteria. 
### Rapid Tests
Many diseases can be diagnosed or organisms identified using various rapid tests. These may come in the form of kits, cards, cartridges, or test strips, and may require various reagents or various machines to be read. Some rapid tests are "CLIA-waived," meaning that personnel without a bachelor's degree or without certification may be allowed to perform these tests. These tests may be used at many different stages of the diagnostic process: at the point of care, when the doctor or nurse is meeting with the patient; as soon as the specimen is received or processed in order to give immediate diagnostic information; or as part of later stages of organism identification, often to give quick information about whether a particular organism is resistant to certain antibiotics, as with MRSA. 
### Culture Benches
After a specimen is plated and the agar plate is incubated for an appropriate length of time, a medical laboratory scientist will examine the plate in order to identify any organisms growing. Susceptibility testing to determine what antibiotics may be useful against the organism can also be performed at this point, if clinically necessary. 
### Virology
The parts of my job that involve virology in our new pandemic era are almost entirely related to keeping COVID-19 testing going, but there are also many other human pathogenic viruses that can be tested for by a microbiology laboratory. Almost all of this testing is done by PCR, which is a term you have probably heard on the news or in a class. Smaller labs tend to send most of their virology testing to larger labs, as in general the machinery and instrumentation required to do PCR is expensive, finicky, and consumes a lot of resources and reagents. Some companies have developed "multiplex" PCR panels which test for a bunch of different organisms at once, and usually these are less finicky and contain all the correct amounts of all the reagents in a single cartridge. However, these cannot be used for all specimen types, and they can't possibly test for every virus (or other organism) that might be present. 
I'm not going to talk about the specifics of our COVID-19 testing process, but in general if your lab does this kind of testing you should expect that when you're on that bench you're going to be spending a lot of time just moving around tubes, moving around reagents, and basically being human arms to give the PCR machines more stuff they need and take away stuff they've used up. I actually really like this bench since it involves a lot of repetetive tasks mixed with sudden problem solving adventures when something malfunctions, but some techs may find it tedious or even stressful.
